Documentation/networking/netmem.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

==================================
Netmem Support for Network Drivers
==================================

This document outlines the requirements for network drivers to support netmem,
an abstract memory type that enables features like device memory TCP. By
supporting netmem, drivers can work with various underlying memory types
with little to no modification.

Benefits of Netmem :

* Flexibility: Netmem can be backed by different memory types (e.g., struct
  page, DMA-buf), allowing drivers to support various use cases such as device
  memory TCP.
* Future-proof: Drivers with netmem support are ready for upcoming
  features that rely on it.
* Simplified Development: Drivers interact with a consistent API,
  regardless of the underlying memory implementation.

Driver Requirements
===================

1. The driver must support page_pool.

2. The driver must support the tcp-data-split ethtool option.

3. The driver must use the page_pool netmem APIs for payload memory. The netmem
   APIs currently 1-to-1 correspond with page APIs. Conversion to netmem should
   be achievable by switching the page APIs to netmem APIs and tracking memory
   via netmem_refs in the driver rather than struct page * :

   - page_pool_alloc -> page_pool_alloc_netmem
   - page_pool_get_dma_addr -> page_pool_get_dma_addr_netmem
   - page_pool_put_page -> page_pool_put_netmem

   Not all page APIs have netmem equivalents at the moment. If your driver
   relies on a missing netmem API, feel free to add and propose to netdev@, or
   reach out to the maintainers and/or almasrymina@google.com for help adding
   the netmem API.

4. The driver must use the following PP_FLAGS:

   - PP_FLAG_DMA_MAP: netmem is not dma-mappable by the driver. The driver
     must delegate the dma mapping to the page_pool, which knows when
     dma-mapping is (or is not) appropriate.
   - PP_FLAG_DMA_SYNC_DEV: netmem dma addr is not necessarily dma-syncable
     by the driver. The driver must delegate the dma syncing to the page_pool,
     which knows when dma-syncing is (or is not) appropriate.
   - PP_FLAG_ALLOW_UNREADABLE_NETMEM. The driver must specify this flag iff
     tcp-data-split is enabled.

5. The driver must not assume the netmem is readable and/or backed by pages.
   The netmem returned by the page_pool may be unreadable, in which case
   netmem_address() will return NULL. The driver must correctly handle
   unreadable netmem, i.e. don't attempt to handle its contents when
   netmem_address() is NULL.

   Ideally, drivers should not have to check the underlying netmem type via
   helpers like netmem_is_net_iov() or convert the netmem to any of its
   underlying types via netmem_to_page() or netmem_to_net_iov(). In most cases,
   netmem or page_pool helpers that abstract this complexity are provided
   (and more can be added).

6. The driver must use page_pool_dma_sync_netmem_for_cpu() in lieu of
   dma_sync_single_range_for_cpu(). For some memory providers, dma_syncing for
   CPU will be done by the page_pool, for others (particularly dmabuf memory
   provider), dma syncing for CPU is the responsibility of the userspace using
   dmabuf APIs. The driver must delegate the entire dma-syncing operation to
   the page_pool which will do it correctly.

7. Avoid implementing driver-specific recycling on top of the page_pool. Drivers
   cannot hold onto a struct page to do their own recycling as the netmem may
   not be backed by a struct page. However, you may hold onto a page_pool
   reference with page_pool_fragment_netmem() or page_pool_ref_netmem() for
   that purpose, but be mindful that some netmem types might have longer
   circulation times, such as when userspace holds a reference in zerocopy
   scenarios.

Commit message:

net: enable driver support for netmem TX
Drivers need to make sure not to pass netmem dma-addrs to the
dma-mapping API in order to support netmem TX.

Add helpers and netmem_dma_*() helpers that enables special handling of
netmem dma-addrs that drivers can use.

Document in netmem.rst what drivers need to do to support netmem TX.

Change-Id: Ic0330599f63c2e6ed8020ff4c7c87b97940f55ad
Signed-off-by: Mina Almasry <almasrymina@google.com>

---

v5:
- Fix netmet TX documentation (Stan).

v4:
- New patch

Documentation/networking/netmem.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0

==================================
Netmem Support for Network Drivers
==================================

This document outlines the requirements for network drivers to support netmem,
an abstract memory type that enables features like device memory TCP. By
supporting netmem, drivers can work with various underlying memory types
with little to no modification.

Benefits of Netmem :

* Flexibility: Netmem can be backed by different memory types (e.g., struct
  page, DMA-buf), allowing drivers to support various use cases such as device
  memory TCP.
* Future-proof: Drivers with netmem support are ready for upcoming
  features that rely on it.
* Simplified Development: Drivers interact with a consistent API,
  regardless of the underlying memory implementation.

Driver RX Requirements
======================

1. The driver must support page_pool.

2. The driver must support the tcp-data-split ethtool option.

3. The driver must use the page_pool netmem APIs for payload memory. The netmem
   APIs currently 1-to-1 correspond with page APIs. Conversion to netmem should
   be achievable by switching the page APIs to netmem APIs and tracking memory
   via netmem_refs in the driver rather than struct page * :

   - page_pool_alloc -> page_pool_alloc_netmem
   - page_pool_get_dma_addr -> page_pool_get_dma_addr_netmem
   - page_pool_put_page -> page_pool_put_netmem

   Not all page APIs have netmem equivalents at the moment. If your driver
   relies on a missing netmem API, feel free to add and propose to netdev@, or
   reach out to the maintainers and/or almasrymina@google.com for help adding
   the netmem API.

4. The driver must use the following PP_FLAGS:

   - PP_FLAG_DMA_MAP: netmem is not dma-mappable by the driver. The driver
     must delegate the dma mapping to the page_pool, which knows when
     dma-mapping is (or is not) appropriate.
   - PP_FLAG_DMA_SYNC_DEV: netmem dma addr is not necessarily dma-syncable
     by the driver. The driver must delegate the dma syncing to the page_pool,
     which knows when dma-syncing is (or is not) appropriate.
   - PP_FLAG_ALLOW_UNREADABLE_NETMEM. The driver must specify this flag iff
     tcp-data-split is enabled.

5. The driver must not assume the netmem is readable and/or backed by pages.
   The netmem returned by the page_pool may be unreadable, in which case
   netmem_address() will return NULL. The driver must correctly handle
   unreadable netmem, i.e. don't attempt to handle its contents when
   netmem_address() is NULL.

   Ideally, drivers should not have to check the underlying netmem type via
   helpers like netmem_is_net_iov() or convert the netmem to any of its
   underlying types via netmem_to_page() or netmem_to_net_iov(). In most cases,
   netmem or page_pool helpers that abstract this complexity are provided
   (and more can be added).

6. The driver must use page_pool_dma_sync_netmem_for_cpu() in lieu of
   dma_sync_single_range_for_cpu(). For some memory providers, dma_syncing for
   CPU will be done by the page_pool, for others (particularly dmabuf memory
   provider), dma syncing for CPU is the responsibility of the userspace using
   dmabuf APIs. The driver must delegate the entire dma-syncing operation to
   the page_pool which will do it correctly.

7. Avoid implementing driver-specific recycling on top of the page_pool. Drivers
   cannot hold onto a struct page to do their own recycling as the netmem may
   not be backed by a struct page. However, you may hold onto a page_pool
   reference with page_pool_fragment_netmem() or page_pool_ref_netmem() for
   that purpose, but be mindful that some netmem types might have longer
   circulation times, such as when userspace holds a reference in zerocopy
   scenarios.

Driver TX Requirements
======================

1. The Driver must not pass the netmem dma_addr to any of the dma-mapping APIs
   directly. This is because netmem dma_addrs may come from a source like
   dma-buf that is not compatible with the dma-mapping APIs.

   Helpers like netmem_dma_unmap_page_attrs() & netmem_dma_unmap_addr_set()
   should be used in lieu of dma_unmap_page[_attrs](), dma_unmap_addr_set().
   The netmem variants will handle netmems that should
   not be dma-unmapped by the driver, such as dma-buf netmems.

   Not all dma-mapping APIs have netmem equivalents at the moment. If your
   driver relies on a missing netmem API, feel free to add and propose to
   netdev@, or reach out to the maintainers and/or almasrymina@google.com for
   help adding the netmem API.

2. Driver should declare support by setting `netdev->netmem_tx = true`
